---
author: Daniel Marques
title: Deixe de ser um júnior
pubDatetime: 2023-06-23
tags:
  - carrer
description: Alguns conselhos para pessoas que ainda se consideram desenvolvedores juniores
postSlug: deixe-de-ser-um-junior
ogImage: ""
draft: false
featured: false
---

> Esta é uma tradução da postagem original [Stop being a junior](https://kentcdodds.com/blog/stop-being-a-junior) de [Kent C. Dodds](https://kentcdodds.com).

Você é um desenvolvedor júnior? Se sua resposta for sim, como você sabe? É porque
seu título é "Desenvolvedor júnior"? É porque seus colegas de trabalho ficam com todo o trabalho **mais interessante** e você fica com as tarefas repetitivas mais chatas e os **bugs simples?** Ou você simplesmente não sente que ainda não "cumpriu seu tempo" para abandonar o apelido de "júnior"?

Seja qual for o caso, quero lhe dizer para parar de ser um júnior. **Pare com isso agora**. Já conversei com muitas pessoas que começam suas conversas comigo dizendo
dizendo "Estou apenas começando" ou "Sou apenas um júnior", ao que eu respondo
"Isso é ótimo! Bem-vindo ao mundo do desenvolvimento de software", mas acabo descobrindo que que eles já estão trabalhando como desenvolvedores de software há mais de um ano e meio. Isso me surpreende. E isso acontece tanto que decidi escrever esta postagem no blog sobre como sair dessa situação de eterno júnior e começar a fazer grandes movimentos positivos em sua carreira.

## A tecnologia avança rapidamente

Antes de mais nada, acho que é importante estabelecer isso primeiro:

> Não há absolutamente nenhum limite em relação à quanto tempo você deve ser um desenvolvedor antes de deixar de ser um júnior.

Qualquer número que você tenha ouvido está errado.

Uma das coisas que adoro neste setor é o ritmo em que ele se move: rápido. Com
tecnologias emergentes o tempo todo e os aprimoramentos da tecnologia existente,
não é preciso muito tempo para que um desenvolvedor fique por dentro desses
avanços em sua área de interesse para atingir um nível de familiaridade
que rivaliza com aqueles com décadas de experiência.

Eu penso assim. Imagine que há um rio com uma corrente constante. Descer o rio em um tubo é como desenvolver experiência em desenvolvimento de software. Ao invés de todos começarem no início do rio, eles começam onde todo mundo está. Não demora muito para que você consiga acompanhar o ritmo de todos os outros no rio, independentemente de há quanto tempo eles estejam fazendo isso. Sim, você terá pouca experiência rio acima, mas isso não muda a experiência que você está tendo _agora_. É uma analogia imperfeita, eu sei, mas acho que é instrutiva.

Agora, é claro, há muito a ser dito sobre pessoas com décadas de experiência, e embora a maior parte seja positiva, nem tudo é! Pessoas com anos de experiência têm maior probabilidade de **aprender coisas novas mais rapidamente** porque muitas vezes as coisas novas se assemelham a coisas antigas (embora nem sempre!! "desaprender" é definitivamente algo que acontece também). Os desenvolvedores experientes também têm maior probabilidade de serem capazes de de **identificar problemas** no código muito antes de eles se tornarem problemas, porque eles viram como as coisas acontecem no mundo real e entendem melhor as restrições.

Dito isso, é mais provável que os engenheiros experientes também hesitem em experimentar novas ferramentas e tecnologias e, em vez disso serem **"firmes em seus métodos."** Isso pode fazer com que eles percam avanços realmente incríveis no ecossistema e nas ferramentas. Os desenvolvedores experientes também podem deixar passar novas funcionalidades em linguagens e ferramentas porque estão acostumados a fazer as coisas de uma determinada maneira.

De qualquer forma, o que quero dizer é que por conta do ritmo em que o setor de desenvolvimento de software se movimenta ser tão rápido:

> Ficar por dentro de algumas tecnologias escolhidas permite que qualquer pessoa se torne um especialista nelas rapidamente.

And if that person can temper their enthusiasm with a realistic understanding of
the impact of their lack of experience just a bit, they can make an enormously
powerful impact to the company (if they're allowed to).

## My own experience

I went to college and had internships while I was in school. This gave me
awesome exposure to the field before I was officially looking for a full-time
job. So by the time I graduated, I had already been working as a part-time
software developer for a year and a half.

When I graduated from BYU and joined as a full-time engineer, **I had trouble
shaking off the "junior" moniker.** Even though all my experience up to that
point had been part-time work while I was still in school, I felt like I knew my
team's area of the codebase as well as anyone else and it didn't feel right to
me that **I still got the lower priority tasks.**

I saw some really big architectural level tasks going to the more experienced
engineers and I wanted a piece of that. However, since I converted from student
to full-time employee and everyone knew me as the student, **I always felt like
people saw me as "the intern".**

Maybe I could have been a little more assertive about my goals and hopes, but I
just decided that the only way for me to get more responsibilities was to go to
a new company where people had never seen me as "the intern" and would instead
see me as a regular co-worker.

So that's what I did. Just four months after converting to full-time, I was
recruited away to my next company where I was given a massive pay bump (over 50%
increase) and 20% of my time was devoted to architecture. It was phenomenal.
Nobody ever saw me as a junior again. In fact, **I was just a step below
architect** in a quarter-billion dollar organization **only 4 months** after
graduating from university.

And that played out extremely well for them. When I joined the company, they
were wanting to do a major migration of their frontend tooling. I was
instrumental in designing the migration path and it was a **smashing success.**

Read my whole story in [2010s Decade in Review](/blog/2010s-decade-in-review).

## How to stop being a junior

Instead of thinking about how to stop being one thing, think about how to start
being something else.

> What do senior developers do in your company? Do that instead of the things
> junior developers do. That's it.

Naturally the company likely trusts the seniors with more than they trust you
and **you don't want to overstep,** but _volunteer to participate_ in the more
complicated tasks. Even if it's just "hey, can I come sit in on that meeting?"
Take notes for yourself of anything you're unfamiliar with and ask about those
things later. In future meetings you'll be able to contribute more and more with
the knowledge you start to accumulate. Study things out a bit after the meeting
and make suggestions.

Beware of being over-bearing. Even though you can accumulate a lot of modern
knowledge really fast, you should be sure to acknowledge that your experience
limits the usefulness of that knowledge. So **be respectful** of your
co-workers. But find the people who are willing to sit down with you and answer
your questions to help fill in the gaps in your experience as you rapidly
accumulate knowledge.

Use that fast-paced technology to your advantage and learn about what's new and
improved that developers at your company can take advantage of today. Then teach
those concepts in "brown bag" lunch meetings (meetings where everyone brings a
lunch and someone presents something often held weekly). If your company doesn't
have brown bag lunch meetings scheduled, get them scheduled and present at them.

Volunteer to speak at local **meetups.** A meetup talk is responsible for both
my job change I talked about earlier as well as me getting invited to join
Egghead.io as an instructor. Propose to speak at **conferences.**

**Talk** about what you've accomplished to demonstrate you really are
contributing at a level beyond their expectations of a junior. Make them think
to themselves _"huh, this dev is only a junior and they did that? Maybe they're
not really a junior after all."_

**Make sure your manager understands** your **goals** and **intentions** as a
developer. If you're hoping to ask for a promotion in the meeting where your
manager tells you about whether you get a pay raise, you're asking way too late.
They should know your goals much earlier than that and you can ask them what
they expect you to be able to do to get to that level.

## Try it 'til it fits

I don't like the phrase "fake it 'til you make it," but the sentiment is here as
well. The idea is you operate on the level of what you want to be as well as you
possibly can, and **eventually it'll start feeling like you really are at that
level.**

I felt like I had to leave the company I was with to get up to the level I
wanted to be. I probably could have managed it with the company I was
already with if I had been more patient. I probably would have done that had I
not been actively recruited out. That said, sometimes if you just can't shake
the "junior" off your title, you may consider looking for another opportunity.

## Conclusion

I hope with this article to not diminish the amount of work it takes to gain
experience and make impact in this industry. It's a lot of work. However, my
primary goal is to help inspire some folks to set their sights higher. You're
capable of more than you think. I promise.

You don't have to be a junior anymore. It's time for an upgrade.

Good luck!
